when I was at my most sexually vital and
excited about life mid-30s I was lean
had a decent amount of muscle at least
for me and really felt good my question
is though do you think if you had a gun
to your head did I feel awesome because
I was lean and had a decent amount of
muscle or did I feel awesome because my
testosterone was higher than it is now
in my mid-40s and what I'm trying to
figure out because at some point I am
going to do trt but so far I've done
nothing I haven't even gone out of my
way to naturally optimize my
testosterone but I feel like I'm getting
to the point now where I need to start
really thinking about that and so I'm
just curious between those two
um for a guy of any age if you needed to
make them feel like life is worth living
would you optimize testosterone or would
you optimize physique
that's tough to say because when you say
leaner too that could be
not conducive to Optimal testosterone
levels too because I know a lot of
people in the fitness industry for
example young guys in their 20s who were
trying to make a name for themselves and
go viral and stand out they'll literally
walk around at six seven percent body
fat year round and they look great and
their ego is inflated and they get all
the compliments and they think it's you
know the best thing ever but their
testosterone levels are like 200. whoa
yeah they're like literally hypogonadal
at 21 years old Jesus yeah from being
lean or from yeah like calorie
deprivation excessive cardio like their
body is an essentially starvation mode
perpetually there's definitely like a
balance to be had where you could try
and keep your hormones as ideal as they
can be well let's say that I did the
blood test and I slide it across the
table what's the first thing that you
would look for you know that the person
sliding it across the table saying I
want to feel awesome yeah
you go to what what are like the top
three things that you're going to look
at okay I guess from the neurological
side and muscle building potential side
I would be looking at free testosterone
in particular which would be the freely
circulating Androgen that dictates
muscle growth if I was to be looking for
signaling to actually determine if you
were truly hypogonadal or not and needed
something like trt I would be looking at
they're called gonadotropins which is
the signal from your pituitary to your
testes to actually make intratisticular
testosterone so that would be
luteinizing hormone and follicle
stimulating hormone would that go down
if I'm on trt those would go to
nothingness like interesting yeah like
they would be subclinical and show that
you're entirely deficient because you
would be using an exogenous Source like
pinning exogenous testosterone which
would then tell your brain we don't need
to make any more
gonadotropins because we don't need to
signal to test these to make any more
testosterone or have spermatogenesis
either and that is where fertility rates
can decline from using exogenous
testosterone as well and then from there
that's where you get the testicular
atrophy from using steroids super
interesting okay so that was too what's
the third thing you would look at maybe
like fasting insulin just to see how
insulin sensitive somebody is I've seen
you talk about this on your show
multiple times but it's kind of like
your body's ability to actually
utilize nutrients effectively and
actually like get glucose into muscle
and if you are having resistance to
getting the actual energy into cells you
were going to have issues actually being
an optimal functioning human and
maximizing muscle growth and all of
these things
yeah it's interesting so glucose has
been my obsession but now as I start
thinking about
what's that next level for me as I get
older I really start to think about trt
uh and for people that don't know
testosterone replacement therapy so
is that do you just look at numbers is
in a blood test is that an age thing
like how do you if you're working with
somebody how do you help them decide is
it ability to put on muscle what's the
determining Factor ideally it's a hybrid
of symptoms and biomarkers however
I'm sure you've probably met a guy in
your life who had some unreasonably I
don't know like crazy genetic
predisposition to gaining muscle but
then on their blood test it's not
necessarily reflected in well how come
their testosterone levels only 500 or
600 and I'm not more jacked and I have
an 800. like it doesn't always work that
it's just you have more tests equals
more muscle than the next guy it's also
you know receptor sensitivity density
gene expression subsequent to that like
there are a lot of things that play into
it so it's not always down to just the
number because hypothetically you might
need more testosterone than the next guy
to achieve the same functions from a
like physiology perspective like you
might be able to get away with a 400
total with a free there's two to three
percent of that and feel totally fine
have a perfect libido be a vital human
and have nothing going like seemingly
wrong whereas another guy might have a
600 or 700 and have symptoms of low T
because he either needs more or too much
of it is being bound up by binding
proteins because of his lifestyle and or
Diet model or what have you
um so it kind of depends like ultimately
it would be dictated by you know are you
waking up with morning wood do you still
have a good libido how is it compared to
you know in your most vital period of
life you know comparing to your mid-20s
or whatever
um assessing muscle growth potential
like that is kind of a metric that could
be used like if you notice your body
composition is suddenly declining
despite you seemingly having the same
routine that you've always had that
would obviously be like a pretty good
factor to keep into account
um but on blood tests typically you're
going to see the manifestation of low T
in that signaling to your testes or if
you actually had it's called primary
hypogonadism is one of the testes
literally don't respond to those signals
and that's like where trt becomes the
most warranted in general can you spike
the gonadal signaling or do you have to
go like if it's low or it's present but
you're not getting the release of
testosterone is there something that you
can do to to boost that signal yeah so
the signal to your testes is all based
on a feedback system so it's your body
determining okay we don't have enough
testosterone and estrogen
to facilitate certain functions in the
body so we have to make more but it's
going to be dictated too by energy
intake Sleep Quality macro and
micronutrient intake not just your
protein carbs fats but also the
micronutrients you're taking in the
quality of the food you're eating all
those things are massively impactful on
what that's signaling capacity will
actually be so it doesn't always boil
down to oh you were just too lean too
like if you were following a diet that
was totally deficient in fat or
deficient in zinc
magnesium like what have you like
certain things that are very uh more
heavily proportionally contributing to
testosterone production these things can
have very negative downward pressure on
your pituitary output of these hormones
and down the line or Downstream to that
prevent you from making as much tests as
you could so as far as like what you
could do to spike it a lot of the same
principles that I'm sure you preach
regularly on this channel about uh you
know lifestyle practices sleep hygiene
diet quality a lot of people Overlook
problems with sleep though with things
like sleep apnea is very common and man
like a lot more prevalent than people
are aware of and they think they're
asleep oh I'm in bed for eight hours and
I'm sleeping but the quality is
atrocious
so stuff like that is uh very impactful
so if I want to put on more muscle which
I do but not so my thing is is honestly
we were talking about this before we
started rolling your time is finite you
can only allocate your energy to so many
things you're going through that now
with content creation versus actually
building businesses
um I have the same with building a
business and building my physique and so
I always tell people you can tell how
much I care about physique by looking at
me I'm not overweight but I'm also not
jacked because it just took so much time
and energy to do that so I would like to
put on more muscle I don't want to be in
the gym two hours a day six days a week
and I know at your Merit Clinic you guys
aren't just like hey get on trt like you
guys are pretty thoughtful but so first
I want to know
it should one put off trt as long as I
can minus like symptoms that would
require that like when I heard Rogan say
that he started trt in his 30s I was
like whoa I I would continue to push it
off unless you tell me otherwise
um well the thing with it it kind of
because again you could go by the
standards of the medical community or
even kind of the more vague
interpretation of optimization it all
kind of depends on what is important to
you so hypothetically if you want to
push your body
harder than even replacement you could
just take full-blown steroids if you
wanted to and it's kind of why wouldn't
we because I'm assuming you don't
recommend that that's the thing is
because when you're saying should I push
off trt it's kind of like well if you're
planning on getting it on it eventually
how much do you care about fertility
right now uh zero okay so that's one in
favor of the trt side
um then you would look at your actual
signaling to your testes and how
adequate is it or inadequate and also
what is your your actual response at the
organ itself and then you can kind of
dictate well is it deficient horribly
deficient like where do I stand on that
Spectrum to actually get me to how I
feel right now because again you have a
lot of pillars of Health that are super
dialed that are also supportive of you
like potentially being right on the
brink of feeling not great like I don't
really know where you stand on that
Spectrum but everything is contributing
in some facet to some degree and trt
maybe it takes you up to the top of that
Spectrum maybe you're on like some guys
are teetering on like the brink of like
being sub-functional in terms of not uh
having a high quality of life it kind of
depends so as much as I would love to
say you know wait five years or wait
specifically this amount of time it
would very much depend on a lot of
context about your own individual
situation all right so deciding when to
do trt really comes down to if it's not
disrupting my life if I'm sleeping well
if I feel good if my in fact check me if
any of these are the wrong things to
look at if my libido is high enough if I
have sort of that you know zest for life
I feel driven I'm still going probably
not the time to do it
probably not so
if I want to start adding muscle
and my T were deficient because if
that's not today it's going to be a day
soon how do I approach this do I want to
take testosterone directly do I want
precursors how do you go when somebody
comes to you and is like hey I've tried
sort of all the
basic stuff how do I now accelerate this
personally for me it would be like a
full-blown analysis of their actual diet
quality which could involve like there's
there's programs that you can use online
like there's one called chronometer you
can just plug your diet and it'll show
the actual micronutrient density of what
you're eating like how many vitamins and
minerals of each there are in the food
you're eating and then from there you
can actually pinpoint if you have a real
deficiency that is contributing or not
um and then that that's where targeted
supplementation could actually be
warranted rather than just blindly
taking a bunch of stuff
um so there's that and then assessing
your what are some basic supplementation
like what's a common pregnancy
yeah vitamin D huge
um do you advise that through sun
exposure or through supplementation
depends on vitamin D man because it's
like modern day is it the most conducive
to vitamin D that perhaps than it was
hundreds of years ago it's kind of I
don't really know what the answer is to
that but all I do know is I see a lot of
low vitamin D statuses these days and
it's very very prevalent and a lot of
the working environments and lifestyles
are very
anti-conducive to getting enough vitamin
D from outside so and some people it's
just like literally where they live so
maybe supplementation is oriented says
the man from Canada yeah I have to use
vitamin D myself yeah no I can imagine
I'm assuming sleep is in there yeah as
uh one of the basics do you consider
working out as a way to spike
testosterone yeah it's kind of like uh I
figure it's called the Goldilocks zone
or P I don't know what the the
terminology is but basically too much of
it could be the office instead of
helpful but too little also not gonna be
helpful too so having you know like a
good resistance training routine where
you were focused on trying to
progressively overload and gain strength
rather than just fluff workouts going
through the motions kind of stuff
um that's more important than cardio
um for muscle certainly for muscle is
going to increase my test more than yeah
building a good muscle focused body
composition is the most conducive to
that for cardiovascular health having
like ultimately these are things that
shouldn't be should I do one or the
other like you should be doing both
ultimately so
um both are going to be helpful but I
would say making sure at minimum you're
getting in your heavy lifts for the week
to the most important of the weight
lifting do you consider heavy a rep
range thing
yeah like uh in general it kind of
depends on what you're going for though
because some people you know they're
power lifters and they are prioritizing
strength over hypertrophy so the range
will differ for them but in general like
standard 8 to 12 rep ranges using
weights that you're not going to go to
complete failure on your first set but
by the last set you're hitting failure
on the last rep kind of thing and then
trying to progressively overload and add
a pound or two every single workout and
focusing on that keeping a very
regimented log book too A lot of people
will just do the same exercises in the
same weights for years on end and then
wonder why their physique doesn't change
but they have not been tracking anything
when they could have been otherwise
micro loading every single time they go
in the gym like there are literally like
0.5 pound increment plates you can buy
in Amazon that you can just chalk on if
five pounds is too high of an increment
which is a problem at some gyms like you
have to at some point you're going to
plateau and at that point is it
reasonable to add five pounds every time
you show up no you're going to be you
know stuck spinning your wheels a bit
and that's where using micro increments
or going up by rep you know doing
another rep on the on the set instead
might be a goal but I found those like
0.5 pound plates really really helpful
what about so your size your duration of
working out I assume you've been working
out since teens or 20s yeah so for me
what I found was I I got to the point
where they were just I it was always a
battle between I'm trying to get my
weights to go up but I keep getting
injured have you given how long you've
been at this are you still like heavier
lifts more reps or at some point do you
go yeah this is the weight that I do and
I'm just going to stick here yeah for me
I have prioritized other things over
body composition for a while now yeah
not nearly as much as I was but I also
it would be unreasonable for me to
expect to have maintained my lifts at
what they were because I used to use
reasonable amounts of steroids whereas
now I don't use those so
um for me though I've just uh I try to
progressively overload when I go in the
gym still and track uh with a log well
it's not oh it's a app not a log book
but you can use a book or an app if you
want
um but yeah I still try to focus on the
same principles but it's certainly it's
not the same weight that I was using
back in the day but it is the same
principles applied and still trying to
make progress because if you're not
trying to make progress in the gym like
you're not giving the adequate stimulus
to tell your body okay you need to
actually grow to support this load
because at some point it gets used to
what you're doing and then you need to
actually tell your body hey you know
this is an increasing Demand on muscle
so build more does that support it
because you can't do it right now so how
do you I mean you're big
like maybe not bodybuilder big but you
have very robust which I'm sure comes
across on camera even hiding under your
sweater over there
um so how much time do you have to put
in to maintain it like for somebody that
really wants to build a physique what
are those straightforward principles
that you're still deploying
maintaining is magnitude's easier than
gaining muscle which I guess is sort of
something people can look forward to is
as much as it seems like a daunting task
to build a bunch of muscle once you're
there actually retaining is not that
difficult
um or at least I don't think so given
that you're not using a bunch of
hormones to support it
um so for me typically I can maintain my
physique on just like a few days a week
ideally four days a week is kind of my
schedule now an hour in the gym in and
out uh any more than that our gym how
many days a week four days yeah and for
me that's just a classic split of you
know chest shoulders back another day is
arms and legs
um I think I don't think I'm missing
anything there um calves on the legs as
well if I came in during your workout
would I think you were trying to kill
yourself no I don't think so interesting
yeah it's kind of like
the minimum minimum effective volume I
can do to maintain what I have is what I
do because I also get my mental
bandwidth sapped when I go really hard
in the gym so if I was allocating my
priorities to gaining muscle and trying
to build my physique up my volume would
look different and higher than it does
at just maintenance amount when you were
adding the muscle if I had seen you work
out would it look like you were trying
to kill yourself
maybe when I'm going to failure on the
last set of each exercise but I still do
that or were you like a guy that was
like screaming in there two hours a day
no what did that look like I think
that's a common misconception that you
need to be in there for hours a day six
seven days a week like even for a
bodybuilder who's a professional and
it's taking copious amounts of steroids
they would probably not be in there
seven days a week for two hours
interesting yeah because at some point
you're just doing so much damage to the
muscle you're never recovering like yeah
it's called Junk volume when you're just
going above and beyond what you need and
it's almost like anti-helpful
that's interesting so where is The Sweet
Spot you get a guy he's a total dweeb
what do we do so uh let's start Natty
and then maybe we'll we'll Veer in a
second but so starting him off
Supernatural but we we need to get this
kid jacked no [__] around we have 18
months to do it so one how many pounds
if we he does whatever you tell him he
eats what you tell him he sleeps when
you tell him he micronutrients all of it
this kid is religious he does exactly
what you tell him to do
what is that going to look like for him
like what do we what do we start him off
with probably figure out what his
maintenance calories is which is how
much he needs to eat to not either gain
or lose weight okay so that's super low
but anyway yeah let's just say we need a
number yeah so 2000 it's probably gonna
be closer to 3 000. really yeah what
yeah for maintenance for a guy who's
exercising regularly and is young man
this is because he's gonna work out yeah
if you were just sedentary and doing
absolutely nothing then you're just
basically expending energy for your like
movements sitting down like your fidgets
and stuff which is a lower calorie
amount I think it's called a
non-exercise or non-activity exercise
thermogenesis or something it's like
your meat calories it's how much you're
going to expend just by functioning as a
human and then on top of that is all
your activity which you then factor in
for your caloric intake what's the
average person 21 year old guy what's
the average 21 year old I think when you
if they are working out and exercising
their maintenance might fall between
like 2 700 to 3 000 wow okay so our guys
at that let's say but now we're going to
get them in the gym how many days a week
I would start with
four Broadway Monday Wednesday Friday
Sunday so every other day would be fine
interesting yeah okay so now we get him
in the gym where we're using your split
which you said was back sorry shoulders
chest back what did you do on back day
back it was just back yeah it kind of
for me it's just back or back buys I do
just back but really do you get buys
their own day or do you treat arms is
one day your mix is weird walk me
through it again again it would depend
on what your weak points are so if it's
a newbie it's totally different for me
like for example my shoulders are my
dominant body part so I just shove it at
the end of chest day and I barely
because your shoulders grow easily yeah
and they maintain easily too so I don't
really put that much volume into them so
for me it's a dictation of my weekly
volume based on how much I can actually
allocate before I'm fatigued and then I
distribute that volume accordingly based
on the body parts that need more
attention so I have a terrible chest so
I do more on chest versus delts I barely
touch them so for a newbie I'm angry
with you
to reflect fact well maybe you have a
better gesture beast mode Okay Okay so
we've we've got the kid it's every other
day yeah we're gonna allocate his energy
based on what he sucks at for now but
it's like figuring out what he sucks at
is impossible if he's never done it so I
would just do like basic you know the
compound three lifts you know bench
squat dead left I would allocate those
to you know squat on your leg they dead
lift on your back they bench press on
your chest day and then you know fill in
other complementary exercises depending
on you know I would probably store them
on really low volume to begin with and
then see how much he can handle
um is it so fatiguing that it's like
affecting his next workout where he's
not performing as well and you kind of
like micro adjust from there but
starting with just you know a few really
strong exercises like it's not rocket
science you do like three to four sets
of each eight to twelve reps whatever
you can handle but actually the thing is
is sometimes coaches
we'll need the clients to send videos of
doing the exercise because their
interpretation of what going hard enough
is actually not going hard enough so me
just telling him do 8 to 12 reps like I
don't actually know that he's going hard
enough I think a good Target is by the
last set of that exercise you are
hitting failure by like the tail end of
that set so like your last rep is almost
impossible for you to do and you need a
spotter essentially should you be able
to walk out of the gym normally if
you're leg there on your first leg day
ever you will be a [__] for a week
you can reboot your life your health
even your career anything you want all
you need is discipline I can teach you
the tactics that I learned while growing
a billion dollar business that will
allow you to see your goals through
whether you want better health stronger
relationships a more successful career
any of that is possible with the mindset
and business programs in Impact Theory
University join the thousands of
students who have already accomplished
amazing things tap now for a free trial
and get started today
yeah but that's just because it's a
virgin muscle
the first time I so I very consciously
went from I don't work out to I work out
like a demon yeah and ah no one gave me
that warning and so I put photos of Hugh
Jackman this is like PQ Jackman
Wolverine okay of God and plastered
everywhere I'm gonna look like Hugh
Jackman I'm going all in so go in go so
hard that if I sat in a chair for more
than five minutes when I would get back
up I would have to stop
stretch before I could walk again it was
Unreal but that became my Benchmark I
didn't want to get that far because that
that actually made it hard to move
um but I remember one time at the end of
a workout so this is I was very poor at
the time and my driver's side car door
didn't unlock so you had to unlock the
passenger side door reach across and
unlock the driver's side and I had just
done chest and chest shoulders tries
which I would do on the same day and I
put my arm down on the seat to reach
across to unlock it and my arm just it
like gave way and I fell in my face and
I was like that's when you know you've
worked out hard enough or was that
stupid and that was just we're now into
it's moving me backwards yeah I think
it's kind of hard to say oh you went too
hard to a newbie because they're super
sore on day one I think that's kind of
expected but they don't need to do as
much as
almost anyone else who has been actively
doing it for years because it's such a
little stimulus is needed to achieve
growth at that point that you can get
away with much less volume at the start
and still get your newbie gains going so
it's kind of like
you know there's no magic number
um but um yeah if you walk out on your
leg day like honestly after three sets
of squats on your first leg day ever
you're probably gonna be sore even if
you're a newbie if you actually like
went close to failure that's just
expected from a virgin muscle so I
wouldn't read too much into it unless
you were literally doing like I don't
know 20 sets of body parts or something
that would be way overkill for a newbie
um if they were just starting well maybe
not way Overkill kind of depends on
again how hard are you going on those
sets right so he's only got 18 months
though so ballpark me if 20 is probably
too many sets per body part what is the
he's doing what Derek tells him to do
yeah I think
um maybe like again this is just like a
ballpark number but maybe like 60 sets a
week and then the last allocating those
between the four workouts and again like
the split if it's two 60 sets per week
per body part no total split across how
all the days and if that was too intense
for somebody too they could technically
split one of those days into another day
in itself like chest and shoulders a lot
of people they need their shoulders
or their chest not like some supporting
body parts might be fatigued that
otherwise would warrant separating that
body part into a separate day like for
you obviously your triceps are not going
to do as well by the time you get to
them after you've done a bunch of bench
press and stuff so for a newbie after
he's hit his you know failure set on
bench and then you tell him to go do
what's his like main compound tricep
exercise that he might be doing maybe
he's doing if he does a close grip bench
press or something like good luck you're
gonna get zero out of that because
you're so destroyed at that point so
that's where you know a separate arm day
might make sense so how you split that
up again like there's so many free
programs online from people who are
reputable in the space with uh workout
programs and whatnot so
um I think it's pretty easy and
accessible to find that now but
ultimately like 60 70 sets a week if you
can handle it 80 but like I think that'd
be a good starting point and just
separating that across four or five days
depending on how you want to do the
split if you want to have a you know a
separate shoulder Day from your chest
day or not it kind of depends again on
your time and whatnot but
um and then yeah just going to failure
in your last exercise of uh the set and
it's uh not that complicated and make
sure you get your body weight and
protein per day in grams
um and if it's not that complicated why
do so few people have physiques
um because I think a lot of unrealistic
standards are putting being put out
there by people in the industry that
walk around you know with 200 total teas
who are natural that maintain these
absurdly low body fat percentages and
then also guys who are on steroids and
you know are very forthcoming or not
forthcoming about them why would that
make so I'm gonna I'll give you a
counter argument they're lazy okay so
put it this way you thought the Hugh
Jackman 2001 physique was great ask
anyone in the fitness industry if that
was good they'd be like a skinny fat
not kidding okay interesting but let's
take this head-on so I don't think it's
bad role models I think it's laziness
you think it's unrealistic expectation
why would that stop somebody from
getting a physique because they give up
yeah I just think there are a lot of
there's a lot of skewing of what people
see as a good physique now as opposed to
I think they could achieve the Hugh
Jackman 2001 naturally and with you know
most people could probably do that
it's just there is so much saturation of
Fitness industry physiques now that it
has anyone who's kind of following that
I don't know niche of content and maybe
it is a bit more of a subsection so
maybe it is only a certain subsection of
people have the word perception
including myself but it certainly is
inflating what is perceived to be good
so I think again the people who aren't
achieving somewhat assembling so we're
arguing about the word good yeah which
is all subjective yeah yeah okay so
fair but I will say I very quickly got
into a bodybuilding universe so I know
the most like distorted physiques ever
and I remember one time coming into work
and showing my partners like I want to
this guy on the cover of whatever uh
bodybuilding magazine I was like I want
to look like this and they were like
guaranteed that guy's photoshopped
they're like there's no Universe in
which even with drugs that somebody has
a chest that bubbly and but even that
like having something to aim at having
something that excited me so much the
idea of being able to one day look like
that even though there was no Universe
in which I was ever going to get there
because it was Photoshop probably
steroids plus Photoshop like really like
extreme extreme it still was exciting
and so it got me to go into the gym and
so when I look at the people that I love
that and especially when I used to be
leaner and bigger people used to come up
to me all the time like what do you do
what do you eat all that and I was as
mad natural as they come which is why my
physique was meh by most people's like a
high level guy be like this guy's a joke
he's [__] tiny and he's fat uh but I
felt really good and so people would
come up to me a lot what do you do how
do you eat like how do you get that
physique and my answer was always like
it's pretty basic in terms of like
getting lean and getting bigger two
separate things so let's make sure we
separate those out I first got muscle
and then I leaned down and I did it
really stupidly and nobody should take
my advice but you can I'm walking around
with the results so that is what it is
but my thing was like the only hard part
here is actually not eating the thing
that you want to eat and then actually
doing the Reps and being willing to be
like oh I think I'm about to throw up so
if you can do that like you're gonna get
the physiques yeah I would argue that
you probably don't need to work to
feeling like you're throwing up though
as well so maybe that might even be
putting people who are completely new
hearing you say that they're like oh
like no chance I'm doing that now maybe
on like a heavy squat or a leg press
then certainly wasn't asking myself that
every day I'm too lazy for that yeah so
yeah like honestly there is uh most
people that don't have the physique that
is the peak of their genetic potential
is out of lack of willpower and
adherence to something consistently
ultimately so it's not like
oh I'm not going to work out because of
this insane expectation I would never
reach it's also laziness too but it
depends on the person I was just saying
you know the the celebrity goal physique
is oftentimes unattainable because it's
not realistic um interesting so we'll
get to that in a second there's
something I want to ask you about that
specifically but first do you regret
doing hardcore steroids no because it
made me very aware of my health and
learning more about optimization and
skewed me in the direction I am now
which is a lot more uh it's not
necessarily longevity focused because
again circling back to the first
discussion we had about should you take
trt or not there's like absolutely
something to be said about
if you wanted to push your body as long
as you're aware of the give and take
relationship of the pros and cons of it
you don't necessarily have to do
anything within the confines of what is
socially acceptable so if you were
wanting to take a [__] ton of steroids
like you you could it would just be
unhealthy but there is potentially some
level of well maybe I want to push my
body a little bit maybe it takes a
couple years off my life but maybe the
quality of life is significantly better
via this so for me it's uh I don't know
I try to gauge these things in a more
what I deem to be realistic way because
I want a high quality of life too so I I
feel like I've experienced the
aggressive polar extreme of I am
deteriorating my body for this extreme
outcome that is basically just
cosmetically pleasing and is inflating
my ego and then on the other side of the
spectrum I'm very aware of the longevity
research and the anti-aging stuff be as
frail and gaunt as you can until the
last day you die but you live to 100 so
great [__] job I want to kind of meet
in the middle that's where I'm at so
having that I don't know the education
or
learning about both sides has been very
helpful and educational me personally
and I think helps me impart that
knowledge on I don't know the people who
are interested that follow my stuff
but do you is do you think there is a
moral case against people doing steroids
like do you have no problem hey you
understand it's going to shorten your
life a little bit but hey if you're good
I'll walk you through how to do it well
like are you unconflicted you give that
advice or is there a little like well
there's obviously some Nuance especially
now that I have a telemedicine platform
and things like some people might think
oh he's trying to like promote
taking hormones via the clinic or like I
I feel like I'm pretty I've remained
unbiased in that even from the business
side of things like I would prefer
people get the full context of their
situation before they haphazardly jump
on hormones because for us like we make
money on services and blood work and
education of our patients not
necessarily just here's a script of
tests and answers all this that get out
the door and we'll just make our money
on the medication like that's not how we
do business so for me it's always been
about the education and I don't really
care what people do as long as they are
educated about it ideally before they go
into it like when I was younger I
started taking gear steroids I wish I
knew a lot of the stuff I know now in
hindsight and that is kind of the I
don't know manifestation of a lot of my
content is stemmed from my experiences
with that and what I wish I knew and
education wish you knew
back then what do I wish I knew yeah
um mainly
the impacts on the cardiovascular system
um that deforms the heart yeah it's uh
morphology and function like the shape
size function of it
all can be very significantly impacted
from basic negligence on something as
simple as your blood pressure not being
modulated or assessing it like some
people don't even check it and a little
bit walking around like stage two
hypertension perpetually because of the
drugs they're on and then they end up
with a heart attack at you know 35 years
old or younger I've seen people die in
their 20s Jesus from that wall
indirectly but it's because of the
downstream effects of that so and the
problem too is when I first started
bodybuilding getting heavily into
learning about performance dancing drugs
and whatnot there was this sentiment
that went around the industry like where
are the bodies and I wasn't very
documented who's dying because it was
not very highlighted social media wasn't
really like prominent and it just really
wasn't talked about that much and
typically the only people that got
reported on that die are big names in
the industry so a lot of people like
bodybuilding wasn't like a mainstream
sport anyways if you can even call it a
sport and
it just wasn't really being noted and
you oftentimes couldn't attribute a
death solely to steroid use anyways
because if somebody dies at 40 it's like
oh the genetic position or this or that
it's like well yeah but the steroids
plus the genetic predisposition make it
way worse so
yeah it's uh stuff I wish was more uh
it's the problem though is that
education didn't exist too so it's you
know I wish I had it but it wasn't
really readily available as well so
that's kind of where I think now is
great because people at least who were
jumping into this stuff
have education at their fingertips for
free letting them know hey this is the
reality of this stuff if you're gonna go
down that path and it's not risk-free
and here are the very real
manifestations of risk profile that you
could expect in the coming years and if
you're going to do it anyways how to try
and attenuate that risk as much as you
can
why does it piss you off when people lie
about steroids
it doesn't really piss me off I just
think it's like disingenuous and
oftentimes it kind of depends on the
person in the context but if you're
trying to sell a product or a service
that is marketed around your physique
and then you are heavily implying that
it is solely your workout program or
solely your the coaching or whatever
it's like yeah these things are
obviously the underpinnings of how you
built the physique but like you also
would be 30 pounds lighter if you
weren't on steroids so I feel like
there's an obligation to at least give
that context like hey by the way this is
also in the equation for me and this is
why I look the way I do because it could
otherwise be misleading if you're this
guy walking around who's this Larger
than Life persona
and people are trying to Aspire to be
like and you're also selling workout
programs or what have you and then you
are or supplements or whatever whatever
it is and you were not being transparent
and forthcoming about hey like this is
what I do but I also do this other stuff
which is massively impactful on the end
outcome
would you have full respect for uh an
influencer coach whatever that was like
okay here here's my workout routine I
hope you sign up it's going to be
amazing uh here's the gear that I take
and uh I've got here you know 30 people
that have taken my course they're all
natural you can look at their results
not as cool as me because I'm on the
gear so I look way better
would you be like yeah [__] yeah or
would you still be like oh God
there's gear involved and even though
he's being honest it's just not as cool
no it's fine as long as you're just
again it's like realistic expectations
if you're marketing it as if you are
representing your out end outcome as an
expectable and repeatable process when
it's just not without hormone
augmentation that's where it gets murky
if you're an enhanced guy and you just
have good information on diet but you
don't talk about your drugs too like I
don't really have a problem with it
necessarily it's more when you're
representing an outcome that is tied to
something you're lying about is more the
issue so oftentimes you know it's kind
of irrelevant to me personally okay so
now my real question that all this was
preambled too do you think it's cheating
in sports if people do
um performance enhancing drugs if it's
against the rules of their sport like it
depends like Brazilian Jiu Jitsu for
example rampant steroid use but it's
kind of unspoken that the majority of
people are just using drugs they can
it's that is like the most finicky
conversation in that sport because it's
technically not banned via you're not
getting tested but it's also somewhat
frowned upon if you're you know the gear
head and maybe not everyone else you
know if if you if you're natural and
you're competing against guys on gear
like obviously you're going to think
there's an uneven playing field in a
sport that is actually regulated and
tested according to water standards or
whatever it is yeah like cheating is
cheating so
it's just a very very prominent thing so
you wouldn't like the double standard so
it's like uh
nobody's getting tested still think
maybe it's not ideal because it it isn't
like you know what people are doing or
you know what the rules are so it still
could create an uneven playing field
definitely hated in a sport where they
say you can't and so if there are people
that are finding a way around it that's
really shitty so I'm all for a world
where uh we just say hey
that we have these exogenous substances
that people can take and instead of
drawing a line I just want it to be out
in the open yeah and so that there is no
double standard so that people can
decide whether they want to do it but
like for
take something like BJJ or cycling and
I'm not an expert man and so who the
hell knows like how many people actually
do it or not but for me hearing that oh
yeah everybody's doing the blood doping
or whatever in the Tour de France I
don't go oh now the Tour de France isn't
cool I go damn like these guys go hard
like they're taking their blood out of
their body they're hyper oxygenating it
they're putting it back in and it's like
I might say I think that's pretty dumb
because of the high risk and like the
odds of you dying you're just
astronomical but
man I want to see I want to see humans
push themselves now I get though that
what I'm saying like hey that walks a
line do we want kids emulating that do
we want to put that out there so is
there like is this just Tom not having
thought enough about it or is it like
hey once you get into the professional
leagues let people push themselves
tough man because it's like I don't
think there's a definitive answer to
that and many debates could be had about
it I think that sport is entertainment
at the end of the day so it comes down
to a debate as to well if you want to
make it as entertaining as possible
obviously sauce everyone to the gills
that would be the logical answer if you
wanted the max entertainment factor and
then it comes after that it's like well
do you want to be encouraging drug use
among the youth to then aspire to be
like fill in the blank professional
athlete you know if they're going to be
getting paid this much is that something
that they should just take that risk in
order to get that outcome I don't have
the answer man it's interesting it's
interesting because yeah I I definitely
don't want to encourage kids to do it
that one really scares me yeah
um but at the same time when you get
into the professional leagues so many
people are doing it I would rather just
see like what's the truth of what people
are doing so obviously the Conor
McGregor thing is utter really
fascinating he's allowed to step out of
the testing pool and as long as he gets
tested for six months he can come back
in now I don't know [__] about like
steroid use but it looks like he's
probably yeah uh been doing something
he's sort of admitted as much indirectly
seemingly and my thing is I don't have a
beef with that yeah me neither I you
know if it's conducive to his injury
recovery and it gets him out there
quicker like if it's within the confines
of the rules like go for it I I think
just a lot of people I don't know if he
became aware of this rule through like
his connections or whatnot or like
finagling in some special way that he
was kind of given more leniency or if
it's just you know his location it makes
it more problematic and harder to test
them because they have to Outsource
people who test on behalf of usada in
Ireland
who really knows but you know at the end
of the day there's hormone use in
seemingly all sports yeah
yeah it's interesting even as I'm giving
my own answer it no you can like hear
yourself say and then almost debate
against yourself yeah well so the thing
the the right question is do you want
kids doing that and that I definitely do
not especially because you get parents
that want to see their there was a kid
that I went to middle school and high
school with now I don't know him well
enough to I would certainly not say his
name in case I'm wrong about this but
what I heard was that he was on steroids
now when I say this kid had density of
muscle at 12. I'm talking it was Unreal
and
that always worried me that if that was
true that that was pressure from his
parents and wasn't I just can't fathom
how at 12 how do you even get steroids
but he he was a freak and
um he he was I think he was like five
eight and he could high jump seven feet
it was Unreal
unreal and so that that worries me that
he has potentially if it's true done you
know long lasting damage and I have to
imagine that parents were involved yeah
I remember tons of guys in my high
school that would take care for really
yeah is that just because you're so
young it seemed so yeah for football
trying to get a good uh scholarship to a
college or university that is gonna get
them further in their aspirations and
yeah it's uh pretty obvious when
somebody shows up to gym class and all
of a sudden you can bench 50 more pounds
within six weeks Jesus yeah that's
interesting now
BJJ guys don't see I don't pay enough
attention but I don't think a BJJ guys
is having physiques so are they doing it
for Recovery or are they all jacked and
I just don't pay enough body weight is
very very important for moving people
around and again I'm not a BJJ expert by
any means but obviously if you're a
heavyweight the more muscle you have on
the easier you can impart and like get
that is that broken down into weight
classes yeah but it's there's
deviations between them and ranges so
obviously if you're at the top end of
your weight class it's more ideal than
being at the bottom or the middle and
the more you can push a guy around and
use your weight to your advantage hugely
impactful obviously Force production
hugely impactful too on anything to do
with manipulating somebody else's bodies
fighting against you oxygen carrying
capacity significantly increased when
you're on androgens really yeah there's
a lot of benefits from it like you could
like it stimulates the release of epo
it's like the main drug used by cyclists
or it was anyway when I say this is not
in my world the precursor to actually
making new red blood cells yeah so
increasing your oxygen carrying capacity
in sport obviously like
broad spectrum beneficial in essentially
anything you're doing with exception of
like I don't know archery or something
and there's drug use in that too beta
blockers for what anxiety if you can
slow your heart rate and calm down way
easier to shoot a Target whoa yeah and
if you use certain beta blockers that
cross the blood-brain barrier like
Propranolol you can actually like very
significantly calm yourself down and get
like an anxiolytic like anti-anxiety
effect so it's very common among public
speakers
um pianists also using it interesting
yeah a lot of people use beta blockers
drugs worry me but at the same time I'm
not like if I needed a drug I would take
a drug I'm just trying to limit the
number of times that I need a drug
whether it's Tylenol Advil
anything I try to limit the amount but
that's from a longevity standpoint not
from uh like I want to see people
perform at their best see it's
interesting though because it's like
there's definitely something to be said
about some genetic risk factors are so
aggressive and unique that pharmacology
may be the only way to attenuate your
risk for longevity purposes so if you
had familial hypercholesterolemia for
example are you going to avoid taking a
cholesterol or lipid modulating
medication yes okay but am I wrong I
mean maybe here's the thing I I don't
I'm not coming from a place of superior
knowledge I'm coming from a place of
paranoia and so I'm just like uh I get
it but like whenever people take drugs
there are second and third order
consequences that we're not thinking
about and so that's the thing that
worries me I don't have a moral
compunction with it but it's like if I
can avoid it it's just way in the ROI so
it's like is whatever benefit I could
get out of the drug going to outweigh
the potential side effect burden even in
the trt side especially the side effect
burden that we don't yet understand yeah
that's the one that worries me thing
though is that some people have genetic
predispositions that you know you're not
functioning correctly if you have a
complete deficiency in the production of
an enzyme for example or you're not
going to take a drug that might
facilitate this function because I want
to be natural like I feel like that
would be potentially moronic that would
be moronic in my estimation yeah
anything where I felt like it was
impacting the quality of my life or if I
really believe like from a longevity
standpoint I'm actually going to live
longer based on the well in fact I was
going to say based on my you know
genetic limitation or problem or
whatever but do you know much about
rapamycin yeah okay so rapamycin I there
were people really pushing me to do
um
because the other diabetic drug that
everybody's like you've got a metformin
everyone was like bro you got to get on
that form and you don't understand and
now of course data's coming out where
it's like well if you need it and you're
a diabetic yes better to take it than
not take it but if you're not a diabetic
it could at a minimum blunt the impact
of working out and may have other
knock-on effects and it's that kind of
thing where
you know follow the science probably a
bad way to say it since science is hey
we're going to be wrong we know we're
wrong and so we're going to keep
refining refining refining based on the
data and so follow the data might make a
lot more sense
um but rapamycin is the first one where
I'm like oh this is really something I
think ultimately this is where educating
yourself is the most important though
because for you with a CGM for example
you can assess what your blood glucose
control is like and postprandial
response to bringing that back down into
range through going for a walk versus
metformin 10 minute walk more effective
than metformin in studies are you gonna
use them that's interesting yeah so but
again does that mean metformin has no
utility depends on the context but if
you are checking your metrics
meticulously like presumably you do and
have all these things going on you could
probably set like be able to tell better
than the data for your specific
situation is it a worthwhile drug to be
using what do you think about rapamycin
do you think it's going to end up being
[__] like everything else or
anything else but the truth is hitting
your career goals is not easy you have
to be willing to go the extra mile to
stand out and do hard things better than
anybody else but there are 10 steps I
want to take you through that will 100x
your efficiency so you can crush your
goals and get back more time into your
day you'll not only get control of your
time you'll learn how to use that
momentum to take on your next big goal
to help you do this I've created a list
of the 10 most impactful things that any
High achiever needs to dominate and you
can download it for free by clicking the
link in today's description alright my
friend back to today's episode I don't
know enough about it to say for certain
but I think anything that is
anti-amtor igf-1 what have you will have
some
positive impact on longevity potentially
but again it circles back to the whole
Roi on Vitality of Life quality of life
relative to that extra few years you've
tacked on so I think there is a way
seemingly and as much as perception to
implement it with a negligible impact to
any perceivable you know downsides from
it like I think people like micro dose
it on an infrequent basis and see no
perceived impact in a deleterious way to
their performance or anything but that
is just what I've heard anecdotally from
uh
um some of my
colleagues and whatnot but I have never
used it I haven't really looked into it
that thoroughly and could be worthwhile
but it kind of to me probably stems back
to the whole
context dependent situation and
assessing what it does to you like
sometimes you just have to take [__] and
then see what happens you know like if
you're worried about what's gonna happen
like you almost sometimes it's just take
the drug and then see if it affects you
bad and you can pull it out and the
half-life is short enough that's out of
your system in five days
so what what are the things that you've
experimented with like that that you
think meh there's something interesting
here as evidenced by the fact that you
you either use it with some degree of
frequency or you use it continuously I
do use a zetamine which is a cholesterol
absorption inhibitor essentially and I
feel like if I can keep my APO bead down
I have I personally have better peace of
mind that I'm not going to end up with
black buildup now again I could
hypothetically get scans done regularly
and check
for a soft plaque buildup before it
becomes calcified and actually get a
cact score down the line like I can
probably you know I could probably
assess that and regularly and figure out
is my lifestyle and diet and everything
conducive to that outcome to begin with
where I even need to be on the
medication but it's been a lot more
difficult for me to get access to that
kind of diagnostic service even in
Canada even as a telemedicine service
provider myself I have to go to the
states to get stuff done and it's
problematic so for me taking a
medication proactively based on what
I've seen in my blood work has been
worthwhile to date maybe in the future
I'll drop it but that is something that
I've been using myself so obviously the
body needs cholesterol is there
something that you do in your lifestyle
that you think is
creating an inappropriate cholesterol
response yes I'm on trt for context so
okay and that spikes your cholesterol
that lowers your HDL a decent amount and
then LDL can be slightly elevated a
little bit it inhibits lipid metabolism
to some extent that's interesting yeah
is that because it's exogenous or is
there like guys just have a naturally
problematic
cholesterol the reason why it has
influence on these enzymatic processes I
don't really know physiologically why it
happens it's almost you know it could be
a feedback loop from if you have
androgens coming in and because again
when you administer this stuff it's
coming in in a bolus that is not really
representative of what would be normal
and endogenous you have a diurnal Rhythm
that you know pulses multiple times and
you have a they're relatively small and
they go up and down and it fluctuates
just like for example when you get your
blood work get it done in the morning
because that's when your test is at its
highest because if you get it done the
afternoon you might be 200 points lower
just based on the time of day which is
notable but that sort of thing is like
there are feedback systems and similar
to what you said what's happening two
three steps down the line
you know with uh lipids there is
absolutely an influence from exogenous
androgens and the more androgens you
apply the worse it gets hmm yeah what
about uh do you worry at all about joint
like cartilage tendon formation if
you're doing
I don't know if the same things are true
of trt but I know that some of the
problems that bodybuilders end up having
which is why they tear their muscle I
remember my business partners and I used
to talk if someone tears their muscle
from the bone I guarantee on steroids
and uh is that like have we gotten more
modern with that and that's not as much
of a problem or are there things you can
do to support that yeah
um there are things you can do to
support it but in general I think that
issue more stems from the fact that when
people use suprophysiological amounts of
hormones as in more than they can
naturally produce they end up with
strength acceleration that is exceeding
what their tendons and whatnot can
handle so just because your muscle can
force something up it doesn't mean that
all of these supporting infrastructure
can also progress at that Festival rate
but Force production from androgens the
psychoactive effects are definitely
significant on your ability to move
stuff around that you wouldn't have been
able to otherwise even you're recruiting
more uh of the twitch fight
aggressive yeah so it's like similarly
to even stimulants like there are things
that can you can acutely increase your
performance even with the same amount of
muscle because you can actually recruit
more
motor units than you would otherwise
yeah
very so I I feel like people are
conflating the fact that people's
strength outcomes and the things they're
doing in the gym performance wise are
exceeding their infrastructure's ability
to support those loads not necessarily
that the steroids inherently are
degrading all of these systems got it
got it got it okay that makes a lot of
sense talk to me more about estrogen so
if you have too much testosterone in
your system it gets turned into estrogen
um
it the common wisdom for an uneducated
bro like myself would be you don't want
estrogen but obviously that isn't true
so is it a ratio between the two and as
testosterone goes up I want my estrogen
to keep Pace or do I really want like a
huge discrepancy and I just need some
minor amount of estrogen yeah the first
thing you said is accurate there is a
enzyme called aromatase and that is what
converts or aromatizes testosterone into
estradiol and this is the main Prime
there's multiple estrogens and different
metabolites of them but the main primary
dictator of estrogen functions is
estradiol and testosterone aromatizing
into estradiol is done at a
I kind of like it's facilitated based on
what you need in certain tissues so you
will have like site-specific conversion
to estrogen in your brain heart like all
over the place and your body's
regulation of this is dictated by how
much input it has from the testosterone
but also how much it needs to facilitate
functions around the body and this is
actually the main
dictating factor or one of them on how
much testosterone output you have
because just like you said there are a
bunch of different things affected by
one primary hormone with testosterone it
converts into DHT which is the thing I
put you through puberty but also to
estrogen and that facilitates uh brain
health it's neuroprotective this is why
Alzheimer's rates Skyrocket and
menopause cardiovascular disease
massively impacted by lack of estrogen
like it's very very supportive
cardiovascular health and vasodilation
uh multiple different things in the body
and having a lack of estrogen is
counterproductive to health performance
well-being I mentioned the serotonin
part earlier
um and even
erectile quality so for somebody yeah
estrogen yeah so like a bodybuilder for
example and I've experienced this
personally taking a bunch of steroids
tons of androgens in my body but
crushing my estrogen to nothingness with
an aromatase inhibitor
I was literally asexual essentially whoa
yeah penis only existed to urinate that
was the function of it at the time I
also stopped caring about uh dating
entirely I was just uh nothing mattered
to me is this peak more plates more
dates early days yeah I guess it's
really interesting what the hell so was
that was that like a three alarm fire in
your head where you're like uh I should
want sex more than I do or were you like
thank God that's some [__] anyway
like now I can focus on what I want to
do and I was just like oh wow you almost
don't even notice when it's happening
and I was dieting at the time too so I
just thought you know some of it is
exacerbated by calorie deprivation
because oftentimes bodybuilders will
crush their estrogen levels to try and
you know dry out for a photo shoot or a
contest or whatever dry out meaning you
get really lean yeah well I'm a I'm a
wet fat they always look a little soft
oh God like it's not good I in fact I
empathized with liver King in the emails
where he's like lower back fat man I
just can't shake it yeah that's my woe
so crushing your estrogen will dry you
out well that is the perception but I
feel like it's a misguided one I think
that you can achieve a body composition
that is dry looking as long as you're
lean enough
um it's just again we're getting to the
hyper extreme that's irrelevant for
probably every single person listening
including us so No One's Gonna Get That
Lean where they would ever be in a
position to want to crush their estrogen
to even try and get dry like ultimately
the main thing to know is estrogen is
also very impactful both in men and
women for neurological Health
cardiovascular health
facilitating sexual function uh mental
Wellness mood regulation just a myriad
of different things temperature
regulation too yeah like women who are
postmenopausal like hot flashes brutal
that is so interesting the number of
things that the body uses hormones for
you would think oh it has one function
if I see this in body do this but in
reality the body has wild amounts of
context and it can use it in very
different ways when I heard that uh
mitochondria have hormone receptors on
them so they both generate and can
receive
feedback via hormones uh I was like I
had no idea that a that they had any
receptors whatsoever but that's really
fascinating how the body uses a
relatively small number of hormones
neurotransmitters etc etc to communicate
and to get the incredibly complex
Symphony that is the human body to do
what it's supposed to do at the right
times yeah it's wild how much stuff just
like floats around in your body and goes
to receptors and binds and then does
stuff and again similar to the genetic
predispositions like some people who
have
like sensitivity issues at the receptor
might otherwise have an inability to
facilitate some function because the
receptor itself is not active enough to
actually transcribe uh gene expression
so they might have to take some
exorbitant amount to fill in the blank
drug or some other thing in order to
facilitate something that otherwise was
just sub-optimal and not conducive to
their quality of life or health very
interesting so I want to go back to when
your penis was just for urination yeah
yeah did were you
did that set off alarm bells or it just
happened so slowly you didn't really
care what happened quickly and it was
like hype I was it was apparent that
this was happening but I uh yeah I guess
over time you have pattern recognition
and I've noticed multiple times certain
drug interactions or are using too much
of an aromatase inhibitor or whatever
would cause a situation where even I
would have a raging libido but then the
my penis would have erectile dysfunction
because I wasn't I was using too many
drugs that were overlapping or I was
crushing my estrogen too much or
whatever like I was aware of it but it
wasn't really clicking that maybe
estrogen is more important than you
think like these are things that I don't
know sometimes stuff happens you don't
aren't educated enough to connect the
dots so at the time I just wasn't which
fortunately now people are becoming more
aware of the impact and why there is
conversion to certain hormones and that
just haphazardly intervening and just
inhibiting the hell out of an enzyme
might not be the best thing in certain
situations so which is great that people
are becoming more educated now though
because previous to that there was and
still like very very cookie cutter
prescriptions of trt out there where it
will literally like compound an
aromatase inhibitor into your
testosterone and force you to take it
with your test and stuff like that so as
long as people are aware of it I think
it is the most important thing but back
then I had no idea so I'm super freaked
out by the fact that sperm counts are
plummeting that
pre-pandemic you had a third of like 20
to 30 something year old guys were had
not had sex in the last year that that
number has probably gone up since the
pandemic which has isolated us more and
more and so when I think about I don't
know if it's microplastics if it's just
being obese which is something we
haven't talked about I think guys
everybody needs to be super careful
about carrying too much body fat but
when I think about if I'm not mistaken
you're more likely to have elevated
estrogen levels if you are obese than if
you're not you're nodding yeah so
adipose tissue will be a direct
regulator of how much aromatase enzymes
you have so the fatter you are the more
estrogen potential you have as well the
more likely you are to get fatter the
more likely you are to increase and it
becomes a positive feedback loop
indirectly not because estrogen will
make you fat it's more because if you
have more estrogen that is more receptor
activation which is telling your brain
we have enough estrogen but we had a
lower amount of testosterone to get that
amount of estrogen because you're fat so
the disproportionate amount of aromatase
activity in that amount of testosterone
you have a disproportional ratio of
testosterone to estrogen because you're
obese but estrogen is one of the main
dictating factors that tells your brain
we don't need more estrogen but what is
it that makes estrogen testosterone
therefore less signal to your test is
and lower testosterone
that's really terrifying yeah so that
obesity feedback system is like very
very suppressive on testosterone in like
a indirect way and that's aside from
like the metabolic dysfunction all the
other stuff that could cause it woof so
D are you unnerved at all by where we're
going with young men being less
they pursue sex less
um
yeah like it's pretty uh troubling and I
don't know how much of it is
environmental
poor diet
Sleep Quality is obviously diminished
widespread now and then but also the
lifestyle factors are very very
impactful too and it's all like it's all
combined and is uh you know culminates
into this you know [__]
essentially yeah if you had to start
teasing apart the [__] and
assigning like on a precise percentage
but like what are our big problems is it
environmental factors is it dietary is
it modern dating and so you're getting
into this weird
um thing where your top tier guys are
getting all the women and so this is
creating a problem like if I had to
start assigning blame I would I would a
hundred percent say those three things
so uh social media I'll round the
cultural problems to that and then
you've got bad diet is probably my
number one the thing that freaks me out
the most and then environmental factors
like microplastics and things like that
that are endocrine disruptors like those
are my big three yeah I would probably
say tied for one is sleeping diet if I'm
even allowed to do that and the scale we
have here sure so yeah Sleep Quality you
know you obviously a big proponent of
what do you think [__] up people's
sleep though
um I I forgot what percentage is if it's
like 80 of people use caffeine I don't
necessarily think caffeine's bad but I
think a lot of people abuse it and the
half-life is like five hours so
factoring in it's called
pharmacokinetics when you factor in like
how long it would take for a drug to
work its way out of your system it is
still in your system it takes 25 hours
at minimum depending on if you're a fast
or slow metabolizer to like get it to a
point where it's not you know
significantly impactful on maybe it
could be like 20 depending if you do
four or five half lives but in general
it's like a full day of clearance
essentially so people who are using it
all day and pushing 500 600 milligrams
caffeine or even 300 400 or whatever if
it's too late in the day even if you
perceive it's not impactful on your
Sleep Quality it could very well be
um so there's that stimulant abuse is
rampant and then also that drugs
Adderall [__] like yeah yeah and those
are going to negatively affect your
ability to get to sleep stay asleep yeah
I've never tried it is it awesome
um it's uh
if you're dialed naturally it will give
you the short-term perspective that it's
better but I think in the long term that
becomes your acclimated set point and at
which point you would probably if you
didn't medically require it it's
doubtful that it would be
it's kind of hard to say because I know
a bunch of people are shaking their
heads right now like no it's [__]
awesome shut up so that's interesting so
the drug I most wanted to try in the
world was modafinil and before I ever
tried it I told people I really would
like to get addicted to modafinil I'm
kidding but that was like the joke and
then I tried it and for people that
don't know modafinil is an
anti-narcoleptic drug that's like
fighter pilots use
huh yeah for sleep apnea yeah I
technically have a prescription for it
what does it makes you stay awake
exactly because why would you give that
to somebody oh oh it's more tired all
it's the ultimate Band-Aid because and
this is like a representation of the
medical system as a whole almost is if
you have sleep apnea rather than trying
to fix your sleep apnea let's give you a
drug that keeps you awake oh my God yeah
so it's like narcoleptics obviously
that's a like a real problem that you
can't necessarily fix but with sleep
apnea oftentimes it's like a physical
impediment of your neck being too large
for you being obese or whatever and that
could be fixable or use a CPAP machine
and you manually manually fix it which
is huge on quality of life and
everything that comes from good quality
sleep and it will add decades to your
life potentially if you're somebody with
a CPAP machine yeah interesting because
your neck is so muscly yeah when I got
my heaviest it became very apparent that
something was making me unable to get
high quality sleep because I started
within sitting down for five minutes
within a university class I would fall
asleep and I couldn't stay awake for the
life of me and this is big from muscle
big
and fat okay so when I would bulk up the
most I got to like I don't know 260 Plus
or something and I would sit there with
uh when I was sleeping I would basically
be choking to death essentially every
night
whoa yeah is that a common thing among
lean bodybuilders
yeah so muscle will do it maybe not as
quickly as but again but it will do it
the distinction between natural and
enhanced bodybuilders I would say it's
more common in lean enhanced
bodybuilders than natural why would
steroids play a role because you have
like 40 to 50 pounds more muscle
building potential than the but it is
still it's the muscle that's the problem
it's just that enhancing yourself is how
you get that kind of excess mass is the
problem so if it's fat or muscle got it
like either way you are getting like a
phys like gravity is working against you
and you have like a physical impediment
of your neck while you're sleeping and
this is why a lot of people will sleep
apnea myself included if I fell asleep
upright I would not snore and I would
not apnea but if I lie on my back all of
a sudden I'm happening again and it's
almost worthwhile like I feel like
anyone who's weighs more than I get I
don't want to put a number on it because
this would be not like a medically
qualified way to do this but in general
just recording how you sound while
you're sleeping if you don't have a
significant other to tell you or just
recording it anyways and just hearing
what are you snoring how bad is it
sometimes people are shocked and
terrified when they hear what's actually
happening while they're sleeping you
would never know unless somebody told
you and even sometimes significant
others they will just think you're
annoying loud snorer
I'll go sleep in another room I just
can't deal with my husband whatever it
is but he's actually like slowly killing
himself whoa yeah that's crazy
okay very interesting tangent so
modafinil uh tried it and I used it so
my wife is British so we would routinely
fly to London and I was trying to really
perfect my switching time zones which by
the way for anybody that wants the time
zone switch like it works like a charm
the second you wake up get sunlight in
your eyes on your skin as much as
possible it is so much easier if you're
going somewhere sunny and warm than it
is going to London is nightmarish it's
eight hours so it's you're only four
hours off the exact flip of nightmare
City and it's always gray and cold and
so very very hard but anyway get your
sun exposure but I was trying to find a
way to not feel that sense of like oh my
God I'm so sleepy and so try modafinil
and what I found was that you still feel
tired you just don't don't feel like
you're gonna fall asleep and so I was
like it is better but it wasn't enough
better to feel like oh I've really
solved this problem
um but the other drug that I'm very
interested in is Adderall just because I
find so I was diagnosed with
hyperactivity disorder when I was young
but because I could sleep through the
night my mom decided not to medicate me
which I will
eternally be grateful to her for because
she had to put up with the hyperactive
child so I imagine there were times
where it's pretty tempting uh to
medicate me to get me to calm down but
she didn't very grateful for that but
when I'm writing especially I find
myself like ah my mind wanders to this
ah my mind wanders to that and when I'm
dialed in and I get so much done I'm
like oh man if I could just find this
flow all the time
Adderall is my one temptation
yeah it's uh it kind of depends how it
impacts you and I guess my description
of what it was like for me would be
probably different than most people but
I actually find I'm uh
almost more scatterbrained on it because
it's really it's very stimulating and it
also elevates my libido significantly
you had me at hello and but
paradoxically causes severe
vasoconstriction so your horny but your
dick doesn't work there we go yeah not
great so oh but it kills appetite
so so much that you can extend your
internet intermittent fasting window to
like 12 hours with relative ease and
then you have four more hours of not
only are you hyper stimulated but you're
also way more mentally sharp just by
nature of not eating food too so there's
that component so there's a lot of pros
and cons and it kind of depends on the
person that's interesting so what's the
as somebody who is very slow to take
drugs what's the downside
um heightened heart rate and blood
pressure putting yourself in a state of
Perpetual sympathetic drive if you're on
every single day which as much as you
know about stress putting your brain and
heart in a state of Perpetual stress
synthetically induced is going to be
problematic also it kind of depends on
which version of it you're using or
using an instant release or a sustained
release the half-life is going to differ
for how long it stays in your system and
as a combo of two amphetamines very very
potent in keeping you not in a state
that can get to sleep and
parasympathetic and calm and relaxed so
trying to be that guy who somehow like
gets the benefits of it during the day
and then perfectly shifts into your
nighttime routine and then wakes up and
is like totally refreshed and have the
best quality sleep how realistic is that
you know it kind of depends and that's
where you would have to use it and
assess and then get your feedback from
your sleep quality and all these kind of
things and yeah like I feel like the
utility of it even if it was via
recreational use would be on an acute
basis one to two times a week because
once you start to exceed that and
depending on your dosage too if you have
too much dopamergic activity you're
causing like cell death in your brain
woof yeah that I am definitely not keen
to do yeah drugs are really interesting
what do you think about the
um the cultural like
promotion is probably the right word of
weed
I think that well thing is is it seems
to have reasonable applications from a
potentially Health promoting perspective
but on the opposite what do you smoke
weed no really yeah interesting okay so
keep going on the opposite side of the
spectrum though it is potentially
impactful on hormone production may have
some interactions with also Sleep
Quality it helps your latency so you
could technically get to sleep easier
that's why people smoke at nighttime but
it wrecks your REM so people think that
they are getting better sleep because of
the perception of falling asleep is just
did my eyes closed and I'm asleep but
the quality of it most people aren't
tracking and in the long term you were
creating a dependency on it where you
will have a harder time not using it to
get to sleep but also your REM is
destroyed so yeah maybe there's some
people who can take it and they don't
that might be too aggressive of a
statement it'll destroy your REM maybe
it won't depends on the person but there
are a lot of people I know who just take
it because they think it helps them get
to sleep but don't actually check did it
help Your Sleep Quality or did it help
you fall asleep so so my wife is no
stranger to marijuana okay and she was
um tracking her sleep and she thought it
was broken because it was like you had
seven minutes of RAM and she was like
and that I think is a literal number if
I remember correctly and she was like
there's no way there's no way the ring
must be loose or whatever and then we
looked into it and it's like weed messes
up your REM sleep she's like oh my God
like I can't believe that it's crushed
that much which is crazy
um why haven't you tried wheat I'm very
curious it also seems to promote a level
of apathy which I am not interested in
whatsoever as the what I would consider
like highly productive entrepreneur type
so for me something that makes me just
lackadaisically okay with floating
around life isn't really conducive to
anything about what I do so for me it's
it's not great like there's no
application of it that I see as useful I
don't have a desire to feel high I don't
need it to get to sleep which I don't
even think it's good for that
necessarily and the kind of mindset it
creates to me is not helpful and if it
makes me hungrier I don't want to eat
more I want to eat less and I want to I
get mentally sharp off not eating so
yeah now talk to me about the I know you
no longer resonate with the name more
plates more dates but what about the
concept of like getting because I think
one of the most important things if you
want to be an entrepreneur and or you
want to get laid get in shape the things
you will have to do to your mind in
order to get your body there it is
I will say emphatically it's the single
most impactful thing that you could do
for the rest of your life meaning all
the areas outside of your life uh would
be to get in shape agree or disagree no
agreed and yeah obviously the impact it
has on health as a whole mental
well-being all that kind of stuff is
huge and if you look good and you're
healthy and you feel good that is going
to manifest in so many positive outcomes
that are outside of what you could even
conceive probably like even if you're
having job I don't know business
presentations or job interviews or
whatever it is like it's only going to
be helpful for sure so I see no reason
to not prioritize it as like the lowest
hanging fruit that is the base
infrastructure for everything you build
on top of it like your health is the
priority which is kind of funny because
entrepreneurs will often skew in the
other direction and neglect it which I
have to sometimes check myself on even
because it's uh oftentimes you can be
you know grinding away for 10 hours and
then you know what maybe I'll just you
know finish these emails and I'll put
the workout you know back another day
and then the next day comes you know
what like I'm probably fine and then
just skip another day and before you
know it you haven't gone to the gym for
two weeks so it is something you need to
prioritize for sure and I think it's uh
I think people know the importance they
just don't necessarily have the habits
formed or the fortitude to adhere to it
necessarily or potentially don't know
where to start which hopefully some of
the education out there now like it's
definitely there's enough information
out there that at this point if you're
not doing it it's kind of like well why
the [__] not you know so yeah as much as
the name of the channel it's not like I
would ever make an argument for like no
if you put another plate on the bench
like you're gonna get more girls that's
certainly not the case and at some point
it's just like
especially when it comes to hormone
augmentation like girls actually care
much less about the enhanced physique
look than dudes do so it's like at that
point you're kind of just boosting your
own ego and doing it for the validation
from other men rather than women because
a lot of women are quite satisfied with
an athletic lean looking guy who's
healthy as opposed to the jacket of his
tree bodybuilder guy so there's that
which is at least a comforting thing to
know because some people think they have
to look like the fitness model to get
the you know top tier women or whatever
but yeah like ultimately the concept as
broadly as you want to take it applies
where it's you know I talk about more
plates it's like physique health gym
fitness as a whole and more dates you
know at the time it was representative
of kind of like lifestyle but even
though it's more dates
um so yeah you know I've thought about
changing the name as I get older it's
gonna kind of gravitate towards uh
feeling like it's oh I don't want to
associate myself with that name as much
but it's also what I built my brand on
until this point so it's hard to depart
from that any thoughts yourself
um I don't think it really matters so it
isn't uh it's not like a gross name I
think that it actually does point at
something that is true to your point
it's the dates you have to broaden out
to mean less about
um just getting girls and more about
when you have your life together and you
have the kind of discipline that it
takes to add more plates to the thing it
really it really is exactly the same
kind of focus and intention and doing
hard things and pushing through
difficulty that you're going to apply to
be good at business but I actually
wanted to ask you so you're in like in
it as an entrepreneur building
businesses what is it that draws you to
that and is it the same thing that Drew
you to building a physique is it
different
yeah there are certain niches that I'm
interested in that I would nerd out on
even if the businesses didn't exist and
one of those is pharmacology hormone
optimization health and health in
general preventative medicine as a whole
and then also dietary supplements sort
of falls into that vein where it's
things that are more on the straight
edge but also fall into optimization
backfilling things that are otherwise
deficient or imbalanced and how can I
you know these two things were areas of
interest for me before the businesses
existed so it makes it very seamless for
me to transition into a model where I am
making content about it but also was
already heavily researching it anyways
but now it's in a monetizable fashion as
well so for me fortunately I don't think
I'm going to experience burnout Maybe
I'm Wrong maybe give me some advice on
that but for me I'm so highly passionate
about the preventative medicine side of
things in particular and the supplements
sort of is supportive of that to some
extent that I foresee myself doing this
very long term Enterprise value-minded I
am rewarded by the process more than the
outcome I have enough money to sit on
that I'm good and this is just where my
area of interest is heavily lies and I'm
hyper passionate about so I don't really
see myself deviating in any other Silo
because I'm so I know what I'm doing is
what I'm supposed to be doing and I feel
like not a lot of people can say that
but I actually know for sure like this
is what I'm supposed to be doing brother
this has been extraordinarily fun where
can people connect with you uh more
playthrough dates on any social media
platform essentially you can find me I
love it keep watching if you want to
learn the daily hacks to melt fat lose
weight and live longer one of the things
that I want to really go ham on today
because you cover it so interestingly in
the book is burning fat
changing your life through your diet and
the fact that people struggle with it
not because of calories but because of a
failure to recognize how individual we
are
um
walk me through that dilemma talk about
how you approach in the book and what
the hell people are supposed to do with
the fact that nobody is like them which
is something you mentioned over and over
in the book
help us
yeah it's perfect man yeah so there's
this term that we're really working to
impress upon a culture called your
metabolic fingerprint all right each of
us has a unique metabolic fingerprint
and this consists of course there's
genetic components there's microbial
components there's so much about us that
makes us so diverse there's nobody like
you in the history of humanity who has
the same metabolism and there'll never
be anybody like you in the future and
the craziest part Tom is that there's
even yourself right now your metabolism
next week is going to be significantly
different it's constantly changing and
evolving and adapting and I'm really
working in presence upon culture because
this cookie cutter system of nutrition
has not is not really given us good
results if we just look at what's
happening with our society a big part of
that as you mentioned when I went to
school I went to a nice private
university very expensive they had a
great pre-med track and I took a
nutritional science class which was an
elective I didn't have to take it and I
thought nutrition had to do with Fitness
right so I was like okay I'm gonna learn
about how to be more fit there was
Nuance there because you know I didn't
really understand the difference with
health and fitness and so the very first
day of class the very first day of class
he said that if you want to control your
body composition all you have to do is
control calories if you want to control
your health we just need to manage
calories were the tip of the spear it
was the thing that we were taught if we
can regulate this thing this entity then
we can regulate our health
now the big problem is kind of
manifested in culture is that there's
actually these epic caloric controllers
right sort of like epigenetics right
there's things that are above genetic
control now we know there are things
above caloric control that actually
control what calories do in our bodies
which gets back to our unique metabolic
fingerprint in a moment but getting that
from my professor by the way sidebar
my professor was borderline obese
himself and he was incredibly brilliant
man and he was doing the things that he
wasn't like secretly going in like beer
bonging like
Three Musketeers or whatever like he was
teaching us at the time it was the food
pyramid right seven to eleven servings
of whole grains each day should be the
staple the the base of the diet and in
that system of thinking all he did was
he created learned helplessness because
he kept trying to do the thing he was
just like well I just need 14 to 19
servings of whole grains and I'll get it
I just need to cut my calories more and
it wasn't working and what we know today
is that for example I'll give you one of
the the Epic caloric controllers you've
said this before Tom you've heard many
people say this it's not just the
calories it's the quality of the
calories just like with sleep smarter
it's not just the minutes of sleep it's
the quality of those minutes
and so now we've got a really
interesting study this was published in
food and nutrition research and I mapped
this out really well in each martyr the
research went to find out what happened
what happens when you eat a meal of
Whole Foods versus a meal of processed
foods and so they had some tests subject
to consume what they deemed to be a
whole food sandwich which was
multi-grain bread and cheddar cheese all
right now that's of course it's
debatable but now they've got the other
group of test subjects consuming a
processed food sandwich which was white
bread and cheese product
and some folks might be like what the
hell is cheese product that's what craft
is craft singles they can't legally call
it Kraft cheese because there's not
enough cheese in the cheese but as I
digress so anyways here's the most
important part of this story
the sandwiches are the exact same amount
of calories the whole food version and
the processed food version
same amount of fats carbohydrates and
proteins on paper same sandwich it
should have the same Metabolic Effect
according to the calories and calories
out model but here's what happened
after compiling the data the folks who
ate the processed food sandwich had a 50
reduction in calorie burn after eating
that meal versus the people who ate the
whole food version all right so I'm
going to pause it there why how how did
they determine burn right yeah so this
is a great example a little sidebar for
everybody to understand the pathway of
fat leaving your body or what we call
this caloric expenditure
so that's one of the things we're
demystifying and he's smart is like
where the hell does fat go where does
fat go when you lose it where does this
quote burn process happen so number one
we've got
when we're thinking about like
eliminating fat we're not we can't
indiscriminately kill a fat cell itself
when you're born you have about the same
amount of fat cells that you have today
what happens is the fat cells themselves
get filled with contents right in the
form of these energy packets like
triglycerides and what we're doing by
the way your fat cells can swell up and
they could become a hundred times their
their size their original size so it's
it's crazy what fat cells can do and so
what we're what the goal is when we're
talking about quote fat loss is getting
the fat cell to number one open to
release its contents then it needs to
get shuttled to its end station which
primarily the mitochondria to actually
be burned at this metabolic power plant
and it gives off this ATP gives off
energy but what they discovered was that
about 84 of the fat that we lose is via
carbon dioxide when we breathe out so as
you describe the sandwich so first of
all the mildly processed sandwich
because even cheese is obviously
processed food
does not strike me as the ideal
barometer for whether this is accurate
so it's interesting that there are still
pretty staggering results between
mildly processed and extremely processed
and then what is your prediction if they
were to do that with like the Sean
Stevenson prescribed whole food diet
would that reduction in burn from where
you're at with a true real optimized
whole food diet be even more even better
yes exactly that's the point that's the
point but that's getting back to what
are your genes expecting you to eat
because the further we get kind of
mutated and away from the the origin of
a food the more complex it becomes for
our
for ourselves to really recognize how to
use that food which created these what I
call these hormonal clogs so this is why
there was this reduction in energy
expenditure post eating that sandwich
basically their hormones their their
tissues became much more stingy and
hanging on to that caloric energy and
fat cells not opening up
so that's number one they and this is
this is the part of the Nuance like we
can't identify the study doesn't
identify right where is the clog
happening but we know it's happening and
I would argue that it's happening
throughout the entire process right the
fat cell being able to have its
intelligence to do its job correctly
because another thing even if the fat
cell releases contents
it can get reabsorbed somewhere else so
it needs to get to its end destination
and then the process of metabolism with
the mitochondria the mitochondria have
to be healthy and doing their job you
know and so so many pieces along this
process can become
uh can become damaged you know and
here's the great thing about us as
humans we're very resilient like your
body can sort itself if you just look at
us like just look at what the body is
able to take how unhealthy we can be and
still be kicking you know but also just
imagine
how good things can get as well you know
when we give our giving our bodies the
right thing so our bodies are always
seeking to get back into homeostasis
it's always looking for that but it's
also very resilient at helping you to
survive and one of the things that I
really want to bring forward as well in
this conversation of fat because again I
didn't know we would talk about this but
in our culture we're trying to kill fat
we're trying to get rid of fat we're we
have over 200 million people in our
country are overweight or obese right
now
and right now we have 43 of our citizens
are clinically obese moving towards 50
half of our population within the next
couple of years it's insane and I think
you come from a similar circumstance in
my family just say I got 30 close family
members 28 of them were obese growing up
for sure and these are this doesn't mean
that they're bad people it doesn't mean
that they're not trying it doesn't mean
that they want to be obese it's just the
nature of the environment that we're in
and not really knowing how metabolism
works and so this idea of
indiscriminately killing fat we have to
do away with that because our body fat
is actually it's pretty amazing it's
actually doing what it's designed to do
it's what's enabled us as humans to
evolve and get to this point because it
was this incredibly incredibly
intelligent energy storage system during
times when things were a little bit
leaner and the problem is we we don't
have any lean times anymore at all so
you were a clinician for 10 years I find
your approach to talking about fat right
now very revealing and I'm interested to
know why you take it so you're being
very kind
um
as a clinician
have you learned that you have to have a
level of kindness to get people to start
doing the right things like why lead
with that instead of just saying like
because your book ends with a
prescription you tell people go do this
and look at you cage it a thousand
different ways or you know hedge your
bet saying that I don't like to
prescribe things like everybody's
different
um why are you leading with kindness
when you talk about fat
oh man I love you this is why I love
talking with you you know it it I it is
very intentional you know I don't come
from very kind circumstances you know
like when I was in college and figuring
all this stuff out I lived in Ferguson
Missouri you know and I lived in uh
apartment complex sleeping on a mattress
on the floor I never met anybody who
went to college let alone graduated
except maybe professors or something
like that but you know just from the
environment that I was in man I was
inundated with poor help and violence
you know and even myself I was kicked
out of high school my entire junior year
of fighting I got kicked out of that
same private university that I mentioned
that you know I went to in the first
place I got kicked out of that school
for fighting who does that who goes to
college gets kicked out for fighting I
just grew up in an environment where
we're taught to solve our conflicts with
violence
and so I I say that to say part of it is
I believe that humans are inherently
good and but we are also products of our
of our environment of our environment
but we're creators of our environment as
well when we become aware of it and so
once I change it that started changing
the inputs I was putting into my body I
didn't just become physically healthier
my my thoughts changed you know my
perception of reality and I came across
this quote from Einstein very early on
and I mentioned it towards the end of
the book that the most fundamental
decision that we make is whether we live
in a friendly or a hostile Universe I
love that quote so much
man like I get the chills right now
because I look I lived in what seemed
like a hostile situation and I just
started to see beauty everywhere man I
start to see potential everywhere I
start to see the goodness in people
because we're all just trying to get our
needs met and seeing in my clinical
practice nine times out of ten the
people making it to me they had been
they weren't treated with kindness and
so I started to lead with that and see
people open up just when I let them talk
and here's a big tip for the coaches out
there if you let somebody talk if you
just ask them questions they will tell
you the cause and cure of what's going
on with them they already know
but we have to have the patience and the
kindness to do those things and also
knowing that
oftentimes even though they were making
the decision to put the food in their
mouth yes
but I'm coming from a place where I
didn't know that there was a difference
I just didn't know as soon as I got
access
I started to make better choices now you
didn't know what that there was a
difference in the foods you're reading
like the quality of calories
exactly yeah I didn't know that there
was a difference between a fish stick
and you know wild caught salmon it's
just food it's just stuff that we eat
and we're just trying to survive
you know let alone thinking about
thriving and incognitive performance and
all this stuff we're just trying to get
by you know but once I became aware of
how much food mattered
that's part one the awareness but part
two is also the accessibility I had to
take myself outside of my environment
um and actually you know go to you know
Mao on the other side of town to a Wild
Oats you know like I had to make
exceptional decisions to make those
things happen but investing back in
myself paid off dividends but most folks
don't even know that that first part is
an option to begin with so we're leading
with kindness we're I'm assuming
lowering people's defenses we want to
avoid the morality of food I know online
you always avoid sort of BS
um you talk a lot about not getting
involved in arguments over minutia and
staying like hey let's look at the sort
of big swaths of what's actually going
to make progress Okay cool so we're
being kind we're I'm assuming we're
encouraging people to be kind to
themselves this is not a moral failing
if you find yourself unhealthy what this
is is some fundamental misunderstanding
but you just said the people if you let
them talk they'll actually tell you what
to what the fix is so if they know what
the fix is why aren't they doing it
this is a great question for me there's
two parts part one is the education and
this is huge and you're a big proponent
of this because you might know that
there's an issue with something but you
might not be educated on why that is and
also what to do about it right and so in
the instance of food I mentioned a
little bit briefly about my
indoctrination in my first nutritional
science class which again my professor
meant well but he was teaching me
something that was fundamentally flawed
because it ignores the fact that your
body is made of food all right
my colleagues I know the top
cardiologists in the world top
gastroenterologist top neurologists the
list goes on and on they might go to
school for 12 years to become a
cardiologist and learn about food for
two weeks and your heart is made of
[__] food
this is the problem like you don't even
know what the thing is made of that
you're treating and then we're treating
the dysfunction with the drug right it's
got lisinopril you've got statins you're
not understanding your heart is made
from food the blood running through your
arteries is made from food the arteries
themselves are made from food so the
system itself is fundamentally flawed so
again people coming in they might be
aware that yeah I need to change what
I'm eating I know that but they're so
far removed from understanding how
powerful it is and what to do about it
because of the cookie cutter stuff that
again my colleague might get get two
weeks of training in which is like a
low-fat diet plenty of fiber all this
really superficial BS and then they're
telling their patients you need to lose
weight how how
like and so often and I talk about this
in the book our system of Health Care
has been treating the healthcare
professionals so poorly it's a badge of
honor to absolutely destroy yourself in
medical school and then try to pull
yourself out of it you know and just so
you see the high rates of suicide
depression anxiety obesity dying from
the very same things that they're
treating
the system is flawed and it's
fundamentally because it's not
appreciated the fact that we as I'm
seeing Tom right now and is he seeing me
we're seeing the food that we've eaten
it's remarkable that's really well said
okay so I'm gonna start um
putting my finger on some of the things
that I think end up causing people
problems this is obviously a world I'm
extraordinarily familiar with so put
somebody on a low enough calorie diet no
matter what those calories are comprised
of I could give somebody a Twinkie with
arsenic on it and if it is low enough in
calories over time if the Arsenic
doesn't kill them they're gonna lose
weight they're gonna lose fat on top of
a whole host of other problems but like
what do you say to that Sean Stevenson
oh this is good and there's actually a
professor who did the Tweaky diet yes he
did the twinkie experiment you know just
like see I told you guys it's just the
calories
now here's some of the fundamental
issues with that because anybody who's
just as even as remotely versed in
nutrition and just fundamentals of
health because again our system of
medicine just focuses on disease not
what creates real Health but like what
is this impact that it's having on your
neurotransmitters this Twinkie diet what
is it doing to your pancreas what are
you making your heart cells out of right
what is the long-term ramifications of
of a Dye protocol like that and so
here's the the term that I again
impressing upon culture is epic caloric
control we mentioned the quality of food
briefly
but another one of these major
controllers is the microbiome and I know
that of course you had folks talking
about this on the show but I want to
take this to another level because this
has to do with your body's processing of
calories and research this was published
in the journal cell really crazy study
they discovered that there's a certain
bacteria that they found in mice that
blocked their intestines from absorbing
as many calories from the food that they
ate right now through the lens of
allopathic medicine
we just need to bottle up whatever
bacteria that is and sell that [__] yeah
just block people's intestines that's it
you know black people's intestines from
absorbing as many calories you can keep
eating what you want not understanding
your body does not operate in a vacuum
there's no such thing as side effects
these are Direct effects because
everything's interconnected one of the
things I saw early on in my clinical
practice probably five years into it
I've been in this space for 19 years but
10 years in clinical practice
probably about five years into it I came
across a study because so many people
coming in statins were like
they were the hottest thing on the
streets all right because that
everybody's coming in on Statin and
there was a study that came out
revealing that
folks taking a Statin had a 30 increased
incidence of having diabetes now all
right something was happening with
creating abnormal blood sugar you know
does this have to do with the beta cells
this have to do with insulin sensitivity
you know that was open for debate but we
knew that it was happening and so when
you when you try to treat that symptom
with okay we just need to get everybody
this bacteria is this going to affect my
bacteria's ability to produce B12 is it
going to affect my bacteria's ability to
produce short chain fatty acids to
protect my gut lining and prevent
autoimmune conditions we can't think
about in those terms so here's where we
do think about it all right so they
discover this bacteria now we
transitioned this over to humans now
this is from researchers at the Wiseman
Institute so Tom in my practice I could
have somebody send out for a stool
sample
never even see them a day in my life
I can get their report back and know
what the high degree of certainty
whether or not they're obese based on
the makeup of their microbes that is
insane
and so the research question is really
fast while you're on that side note what
comes first
do you just have a bad roll of the dice
and you came out of your mother's womb
and the microbiome that you formed
happen to be obesity
um promoting or is it your diet the
microbes respond to the fact that you're
eating Cheetos and all that kind of
stuff all your cheese-like products uh
yeah which which comes first
it's a both end world it's a both end
World um because we are getting that
down low specifically from our mother
but one of the studies was done in
identical twins all right you don't get
more similar of a person to study or
people to study to see the effects of
one thing or the other than identical
freaking twins man when they find a twin
whose bacteria Cascade is associated
with obesity insulin resistance and and
weight gain and then they find I know
one of the other twins who has an in a
microbiome who's that's associated with
leanness right and they track them over
years that they're they're in the same
household eating the same diet but the
twin who has the microbiome with the
Cascade associated with obesity became
insulin resistant more often became
obese more often than their lean
microbiome twin right and the microbiome
shifts based on our choices based on our
lifestyle because one of the number one
drivers and I broke this down any smart
as well
what we discover is that folks who are
eating more of a quote traditional diet
their hunter-gatherer closer to that
type of diet they have upwards of four
times greater diversity in their
microbes than the average person in the
Western World we're losing our diversity
like crazy
and a big part of this is we're not
feeding the microbes their preferred
food source for them to stick around in
the first place
all right so these are what we call
prebiotics and anybody can go to Google
and look in Prebiotic foods but that's
limited thinking like we've got
asparagus Jerusalem artichoke onions and
garlic that's small small potatoes
here's the truth every single food has
Prebiotic capacity every single real
food for some strain of bacteria and
there might be a food that your
ancestors have been eating for centuries
that is suddenly Stripped Away
diet choice or just by by proxy just by
the environment that you're in and
suddenly you don't have that bacteria
getting fed anymore it has no choice but
to become extinct in your system right
and so what the researchers discovered
was that the number one way as your
bacteria diversity goes down your rate
of insulin resistance goes up bacterial
diversity goes down your rate of
diabetes goes up your rate of obesity
goes up your rate of insomnia goes up as
you rate of microbes goes down all right
we know that they have an inverse
relationship the number one way to
reverse and improve the diversity of our
microbes is so simple is to just simply
increase the diversity of foods that
we're eating now why does that work I
get why if I had depleted a population
and I can bring back what is there but
if it's truly gone extinct
is there dirt on the food like how am I
repopulating if I'm not taking a
supplement of some kind with a probiotic
in it
yeah this is a great question as well so
number one uh in my practice I put
people on probiotics so frequently and
we would get like these credible
probiotic formulas some of them take
like
two years fermentation process like
Wizards do spells over them all kinds of
[__] but we were missing the point
because they they're not able to
colonize it to populate in the gut to do
all the cool things that they could
potentially do if
they're not given their preferred food
substrates they're not giving their
Prebiotic sources and so to answer that
question yes we do want to have sources
of probiotics coming in
preferably through food right and we do
go through that
but also the most important thing again
is not missing the point and this is the
this is the point
when you eat a food when you would just
say we eat a berry when you're eating
that Berry you're eating a Prebiotic and
you're eating that berries microbiome as
well
you're taking that on yourself so it is
coming along with probiotic with
bacteria it's just the nature of eating
real food same thing with an avocado
you're eating that avocados microbiome
if you eat some kale you're eating that
Kale's microbiome if you eat some
walnuts you're eating that walnuts
microbiome so we have this limited
thinking that I need probiotic
you know some kind of special probiotic
food I need some special probiotic
supplement no we're really missing the
point here food already has the thing
but for many of us especially where we
are we can like Leverage because I know
some people have gotten some wonderful
benefits adding in some fermented foods
absolutely but we don't want to miss out
on this Prebiotic because prebiotics are
needed for the probiotics to make
post-biotics all right so this is when
they're making
vitamins minerals short chain fatty
acids in you for you it's this beautiful
symbiotic relationship so I hope that
works it does I want to draw a straight
line from the question about hey you can
eat a Twinkie and if your calories are
low enough you are going to lose fat and
the punchline of what you just said so
here's what I'm taking away from that
you actually can for sure I promise you
you can lose weight eating anything if
you keep your calories low enough now
some foods because of the signaling
effect of calories and not all calories
are the same you may have to restrict
Tighter and Tighter and Tighter on
certain foods than you would on others
and so yes you can lose weight eating a
Twinkie diet but as you mentioned not
only do we have those kind of effects
but your blood vessels and all of the
other stuff are made up of the very
things that you eat and in processing
the like at a cellular structural level
and a signaling level
you're changing
the material that you're taking in and
it's like I get why people are obsessed
with like getting shredded and being in
good shape but when you begin to
understand that that is
ah thing that happens and that there's
actually a whole host of things that
happen
then people begin to think about it the
right way now what I found amazing about
your book is you call out directly
hey boys and girls don't worry about
whether you're paleo vegan uh carnivore
what none of that matters listen to your
body
yeah now it's what I want to know is
what the hell do you mean by that
we're right now there's a lot of
infighting over minutia as you mentioned
that I said earlier
um and these wonderful diet Frameworks
these are my friends you know the top
person in each of those and they the
reason that they write these books and
that they have these positions is that
they see results for their patients they
see results for the people that they're
working with they're not trying to be
negligent they're not trying to ignore
the data they're helping people but
what's also overlooked is that there's a
large percentage of people that each of
their diet Frameworks is not helping and
that's the truth and a big part of that
is
many of these diet Frameworks even
though they can be wonderful
they can also imprison you and they can
leave things out make things off limits
that you might need that somebody else
doesn't need right but also it might be
protecting you for something you know so
there's there's balance there but we
have to have a little bit more
agency over our thoughts agency over our
choices and this gets into the
discomfort of becoming more educated
about who we are you know and
fortunately there's no easy way around
this you know if you're really going to
thrive and to be the best version of
yourself we have to learn how we work
but the thing the thing that I want
people to understand and just kind of
going back I got to really wrap this
point up because you really like made
that hard line point about this with the
twinkie diet
those researchers at the Wiseman
Institute who understand about what's
you know the bacteria and mice they took
bacteria samples fecal samples which
fecal transplantation is like one of the
hottest things on the street as well
it's super weird but it is
um but they take they took these fecal
samples from folks who had a bacteria
Cascade associated with obesity and
implanted it into lean mice
they took another set of fecal samples
from Human subjects who had a bacteria
Cascade associated with lameness and
implanted that into lean mice those mice
stayed lean the mice who received the
implants from the folks with the
bacteria Cascade associated with obesity
those mice became insulin resistant they
gained weight and gained body fat not
because of calories not because they
changed what they were eating because of
the bacteria
these principles supersede any of the
ideas that we carry about just managing
calories if you just get into a caloric
deficit because the mice are already
eating the same thing yet they're
gaining weight and I've seen again many
other people listening especially if
they're in healthcare people coming in
they're already
at a thousand calorie a day diet you
know and maybe they're six feet tall and
their weight loss has been stuck and
then we once we can have a certain level
of like stepping away and not thinking
we have all the answers and listen to
the person do some investigation we
might find out there's an underlying
autoimmune condition a thyroid issue we
might find out that inflammation is the
causative Factor because as you
mentioned we talk about that as well
there's so many things that control what
calories do not to say that being in a
caloric deficit can't just make weight
fly off of somebody absolutely but even
within that there are things controlling
that person's metabolism that's going to
out picture different results from
somebody who might be at the exact same
height and weight starting off as them
where I want to keep pushing on though
is this notion of self-awareness and how
you listen to your body so I'll give you
an example when I first started working
out I had been working out probably for
about eight months before I realized
that you could fire your lats like you
could actually send a signal to that
part of your back and it would pull your
arms down and you have this
understanding of whoa when I fire that
muscle I feel it I can actually feel
that muscle Contracting and I now have a
level of control
with food it's the same but it's like
steering a boat when you steer a boat
you do something nothing happens and
then six seconds later the boat moves so
it is very hard to drive a boat because
you have to account for that leg food is
insanely complicated if you eat one
thing and you're in a good mood you'll
be fine you eat the same thing in a bad
mood and it upsets your stomach it's so
complicated I mean that's just one of a
bazillion different ways but people
don't
learn to connect I ate this thing and I
feel this way I'll give you example for
my own life about six months ago
Sean I'm I'm always sharp and I was just
like
just in the middle of the day all the
time and I was like way out of it and
then finally I connected that feeling
with the word people use for brain fog I
had never understood what people meant
by brain fog and so all of a sudden I
was like is this brain fog and I was
like oh my God this is brain fog I don't
think I'm tired this is if it's brain
fog it is almost certainly something I'm
eating I end up tracking it down it was
pecans
I have no idea why I can eat pecans but
when I eat them every day all of a
sudden because I'd gotten into this
routine where one of my meals was made
with a lot of pecans it was amazing and
over time and that was the worst part it
probably took four months of me eating
those that meal almost every day to get
to that point but then once I was there
until I removed them from my diet I
couldn't shake it no matter how much I
slept
caffeine nothing I just felt that brain
fog stopped eating them it was gone in
like 48 hours that's so crazy and this
is the thing is it can be something so
small and subtle like that and what
you're bringing up and how do we kind of
get this inner guidance system back
online first of all it's an
acknowledgment that it exists because in
our system we are so focused on
objective measures which I'm very
analytical so I'm super into that stuff
but being able to track the data the
things that everybody else can measure
isn't even remotely close to how
powerful your subjective experience is
tell me something that matters more than
how you feel
I'll wait you know this is the thing
this is the most important barometer of
everything in our life and yet we get we
pay so little attention to it so basic
metrics that we can pay attention to
when we eat a meal just seeing how does
that make me feel how does a digestive
process feel but so I think so often as
well we start to have these alarms that
go off when we eat certain things and we
just keep hitting the snooze button on
it like ah you know this fatigue is
normal this stomach discomfort we get
these different responses your body's
giving you feedback that something's
wrong something's not right here and yet
we accept it as normal and so that inner
intelligence we start to create a lot of
static on the line all right so that's
part of it is being able to clear off
the static on the line and I want to add
another layer here just with a little
bit more science on what that static on
the line can look like
there's this wonderful ex I talk about
the signs of flavor in each smarter and
there's this wonderful occurrence it's
something called post ingestive feedback
right post ingestive feedback and
essentially through our Evolution
whenever we would eat a food your body
your brain your your tissues are
essentially like taking notes like okay
you know we'll just say just found some
wild berries you ate I got some Copper
from this I got some selenium I got some
of some amino acids I got a little bit
of uh Omega-3s from the seeds
your your body is taking notes that when
you eat that food is connecting a flavor
sensation to those nutrients and so now
when you start to become deficient in
those nutrients your body can submit a
craving a craving signal to go and eat
that food to get those nutrients back to
where we need them to be now here's the
problem
processed food manufacturers have really
muddied up the Waters of this
post-congestive feedback because now we
can make things taste like different
things all the time and it doesn't have
to be exact but it's just enough to
create enough
biological interference that we don't
even have that intelligence anymore
right so
a big takeaway from today and just
overall for everybody is that chronic
nutrient deficiency leads to Chronic
overeating
chronic nutrient deficiency leads to
Chronic hunger
when we're having these deficiencies
part of the big reason why we're having
haphazard hunger and Cravings our bodies
are driving us it's not just the fact
that we're addicted right that's that
can be dismissive they're just addicted
to Sugar well they're probably deficient
in damn near every single nutrient that
they need to actually Thrive all right
and your body is going to keep
compelling you to eat more to get those
things in that's how we evolved and so
having that process you know again to
become kind of skewed and twisted up it
just it makes another layer of
complexity of trying to figure out this
inner intelligence so to to help with
this and I provided some very specifics
in the book but again I'm very much on
we've got to experiment for yourself but
one of the things I was found to help to
reduce the impact of hyperpolitable
foods on our brain
funny enough is chlorophyll all right
chlorophyll was yeah chlorophyll is
found to help to reduce the urge to eat
hyperpolitable foods and also to reduce
neural inflammation okay do you take it
as a supplement
so just in Foods you know chlorophyll
Anything Green is going to be a good
source of chlorophyll so of course green
leafy vegetables but then you've got
these super dense sources of chlorophyll
like chlorella you know they even got
its name chlorella from the high
chlorophyll content spirulina but then
you also get these other benefits there
like with spirulina is one of the foods
clinically proven to reduce neural
inflammation and why am I bringing this
up where's the interference in being
able to know how we feel and what do we
need
Tom I want everybody to get this because
you're not going to hear you're going to
hear this in a few years
but right now you're here here first
with Tom bilyu
one of the biggest epidemics we're
facing today
is neural inflammation all right
inflammation of the brain and one of the
studies that I talked about in the book
this is published in the annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences
they they reported that specifically
hypothalamic inflammation and your
hypothalamus is like
this is like your body's internal
thermostat
we're literally regulating what your
metabolic rate is your brain doesn't
give a [__] how many if you're trying to
calorie count your hypothalamus can tell
your gut to reduce the absorption of
calories that you just ate
your hypothalamus can tell your gut to
increase the absorption of calories and
food you just saved all right these
things are epical or controllers
superseding that normal function so what
they discovered was that
hypothalamic inflammation
is one of the biggest driving forces of
obesity
because it's throwing off our metabolic
rate all right and here's the other side
obesity is one of the biggest causes of
hypothalamic inflammation
and it's just creating this
terrible Loop where people can't get out
of it and again I know my friends you
might have these diet Frameworks but if
we're not explicitly
helping people to reduce the
inflammation in their brain we might
just be spinning our Wheels here but
many of these wonderful diet Frameworks
though that are really worth their salt
they're accidentally doing it anyways
they're helping to reduce neural
inflammation one of the foods that was
again clinically proven to reduce
inflammation neural inflammation
funny enough and I I'm this is not an
advocation for this food it's just the
data exists I was shocked
researchers at Auburn University found
that oleocanthal rich extra virgin olive
oil
is incredibly effective at reducing
brain inflammation and it's been found
to repair the blood-brain barrier all
right your internal security system
basically keeping things out of your
brain that creating more inflammation
that gets damaged over time especially
from you know excess sugar and the list
goes on and on but wow I didn't know
olive oil can do that [__] that's really
remarkable and what they found was this
two to three tablespoons a day
and how do you go about that there's
Nuance there too you know
um olive oil if you've ever seen it in
the stores nine times out of ten it's in
dark glass this is because it's
photosensitive
light can damage olive oil
all right and so you don't want it to be
in clear plastic it's already nasty it's
already messed up all right number one
and also is this should bring up well
should I be cooking with it you can
and it might be healthier well
definitely healthier than these highly
processed seed oils you know canola oil
and vetcoat vegetable oil
but
very low heat but ideally in folks
traditionally we're going to use it as a
finisher so your meal is finished plate
it and you drizzle some olive oil on use
it to make dressings people put it on
sourdough bread talk to me about that so
massive individual variability nobody is
ever going to be like you again nobody's
had digestion like you nobody ever will
have digestion like you so you are doing
an end of one experiment whether you
want to or not how do people figure out
what to eat
so this gets down to a principles and
not
not written rules not deaf definitive
points because again everybody is unique
so there's going to be principles in
every diet framework that are going to
make them successful and then there's
going to be things that can make any
diet framework go terribly wrong right
so what we want to do is
eat eat in a way that number one and I
just mentioned this earlier to help to
reduce inflammation so that these
internal guidance systems can be get
back online this inflammation is it's a
really it sounds kind of kooky Tom I
don't know about you but it's just
inflammation inflammation but it is a
real problem because
information number one is not a bad guy
that's number one we need inflammation
it's a functional part of our immune
system or part of our healing a part of
just cellular processing period we don't
want no inflammation it's a part of
growth however chronic inflammation
inflammation where it's not supposed to
be like this heightened neural
inflammation can really really mess us
up so the biggest driving force is for
most of us today with inflammation
specifically gut inflammation is the
consumption of pesticides herbicides
rodenticides and you know I get I did
share one of the studies in the book
Finding conclusively meta-analysis that
pesticides do in fact not only create
inflammation in the gut but create
abnormal uh gene expression from your
microbes right your micro most of our if
we go Gene for Gene most of the genes We
Carry in our bodies are not ours all
right we're 99 percent
genes of other you know are our bacteria
Cascade that we're carrying around with
us and so these things damage our Gene
micro the microbial expression of our
genes all right so this is not a small
thing
and we've come to accept it as normal
and right now we have
literally thousands of pesticides have
been approved by the EPA so-called
Environmental Protection Agency
supposedly protecting us many of them
have been recalled many of them are
actually caught up in red tape right now
like clip pyrophos for example that's
been found study after study to lead to
uh neurodegenerative diseases
specifically for development of babies
and creating brain damage and including
skyrocketing rates of miscarriages you
would think it would be it would have
been gone it's happened so many times
it's disgusting because with these
companies it isn't innocent until proven
guilty it's innocent until it cuts into
their bottom line enough the lawsuits
because it's just you know it's just
business as usual they already have a
certain amount of set aside for all the
damage it's going to cost so it when
we're talking about avoiding pesticides
this isn't a it's not a trendy thing
that I'm talking about here these
chemicals are not designed for human
consumption but the pre is generally
regarded as safe because we're a bigger
organism we're bigger than a little pest
that they're trying to kill but things
bioaccumulate in our tissues and number
one and number two we're made of little
things smaller than those damn pests
we're made of these things and they're
damaging our microbes they're damaging
ourselves so do we avoid that by eating
organic organic there's Nuance there
with Organic but it's going to be a
generally a good step to make and we can
do that ourselves and as we continue to
demand it there's going to continue to
change what's available in the market
for sure so and also a way around that
because again not having a lot of money
I would start to go to farmers markets
there was a farmer's market in Ferguson
and meet the farmers ask them hey are
you guys spreading [__] on your lettuce
you know and they're like absolutely not
you know and just talking to them
learning you know there's many in this
much less cost right I can get three
times the amount of lettuce that I was
buying at Whole Foods or whatever there
for the same amount of money so
um so yes avoiding the things that are
damaging this internal intelligence that
are damaging our our metabolism right so
that's just one
but then adding things in as well that
help to reduce inflammation so what does
that look like one of the most important
time and I'm going to say this again and
again because it says
this has to do with metabolism but also
it has to do with our Sleep Quality it
also has to do with our cognitive
performance and I know this is important
for you as well and this is the need to
make sure we're getting in plenty of DHA
and EPA all right this is so freaking
important I don't even want this to if
anybody does anything from this episode
I want to make sure that you're getting
in enough omega-3 fatty acids in the
form of DHA and EPA so
number one
DHA and EPA have expressed Lanes if you
want to think about the blood-brain
barrier being like a toll booth they
have Express passes to get into the
brain like your brain sucks them up like
in droves because they're needed for
structure of your brain cells
Omega-3s function as structural fats in
your brain creating plasticity
creating stability and signal
transduction so your brain cells can
actually talk to each other
without Omega-3s [__] goes wrong real
fast to the degree one of the craziest
studies in the book they found that the
folks who had the lowest intake of DHA
and EPA had the highest rate of brain
shrinkage all right your your brain
literally shrinks rapidly if you're not
getting these fats head and so what it
was was just under 1.2 teaspoons a day
anything under that
increase the rate of brain shrinkage
what are the best three foods or
supplements to get your um
DHA and EPA
okay perfect
food first food first the journal
neurology found that folks who consume
Just One Seafood meal per week do in
fact perform better cognitive skills
tests I think that's a direct one-to-one
response to those Omega-3s but if you if
you're not taking uh if you're taking a
beacon or vegetarian protocol I've got
news for good news for you too but food
first and then of course there's
grass-fed beef in that same Spectrum has
Omega-3s a high ratio of Omega-3s eggs
the best food source though Tom is not
the fish the fatty fish but the fatty
fish eggs so salmon Roe and caviar can
have three times more DHA and EPA than
the fish itself and then we've got from
there most of the studies done on DHA
and EPA is done via fish oil all right
so I did share some studies in the book
that are just really shocking when it
comes official but then from there the
next rung down is krill oil right Krill
that's the microscopic shrimp super
dense and acid xanthin which makes your
body absorb Omega-3s even better it's
incredible that might be for somebody
who's doing a vegetarian protocol
wherever that lies on your ethics krill
oil might be a savior for your brain if
anything everybody today even if you're
taking a vegan protocol please get
yourself an algae oil all right a high
quality algae oil it has the DHA and EPA
there but we don't have clinical studies
now to see its Effectiveness but we do
know that it's there and I just don't
want you to wait around for that data
DHA is so important for your brain just
to be clear this is the plant source is
ala right that's what you find in chia
seeds and flax seeds and hemp seeds I
would have patients get flaxseed oil for
years I was missing the point it's not
the same as DHA and EPA but it's so
important for your brain that your body
can convert some ala into DHA but you
can lose depending on your metabolism
your unique metabolic fingerprint you
can lose 90 in the conversion process
and so you'll have to eat
five bags of chia seeds a day to get
what your brain needs you know it's just
not doable
and plus you probably want to leave the
bathroom at something
so that's that's that part and I also
want to share this really quickly with
Omega-3s and omega-6s this was a study
this is published in the journal
nutrients and it found that a large
increase in the ratio of omega-6s in the
diet compared to Omega-3s directly
increases our risk of obesity but here's
the most important part listen to this
[__]
this another study and this was
highlighted and then I broke this down
I'm getting giggy giddy right now
another study highlighted in each mortar
found that an imbalance in omega-6 is to
Omega-3s leads to dysfunction of your
hunger related hormones and increase fat
storage even with calories being the
same
even with calories being the same people
with a higher intake of omega-6s gained
more weight
and more body fat it had more
dysfunction to their hunger related
hormones all right epicolor controller
Omega-3s help to reduce inflammation
omega-6 are not bad but we need more
Omega-3s right now because we become
such a mega6 dominate Society
click here now to learn the top foods
that melt fat build muscle and prevent
chronic disease six out of seven people
who go on a diet lose weight
it's pretty simple it's not easy
people don't adhere long term to diets
about 90 plus percent of people